Chicago anti-ICE protesters block vehicles, get hit with tear gas and pepper balls

At least 50 protesters were seen midday Friday at an ICE processing center in Broadview, Illinois, a suburb of Chicago.

An ICE spokesperson told Fox News that two were arrested, one of whom was carrying a firearm.

video showed federal law enforcement attempting to clear the protesters out of the area.

The demonstrators were also seen trying to block vehicles from leaving.

Last week, violent clashes between protesters and ICE agents at the facility led to 16 arrests.

The crowds protesting Friday are in opposition to the transfer of ICE detainees to out-of-state holding centers, according to Fox 32 Chicago.

A shooter opened fire at an ICE facility in Dallas, Texas.

The gunman in that incident killed one detainee and injured two others before taking his own life, authorities said.

Greg Norman-Diamond, Reporter at Fox News Digital

Patrick McGovern, Contributor to report

Michael Tobin, Contributor to report

Peter Pinedo, Contributor to report

ICE (Immigration and Customs Enforcement), Organization

DHS (Department of Homeland Security), Organization

Governor [JB] Pritzker, Governor of Illinois

Fox News, Media Outlet

Fox 32 Chicago, Media Outlet

Federal law enforcement, Agency

Anti-ICE protesters, Group

September 26, 2025 1:44pm EDT: Publication date of the report

Friday, midday: At least 50 protesters gathered at an ICE processing center in Broadview, Illinois

Friday, midday: Federal law enforcement used tear gas and pepper balls against protesters

Friday, midday: Two protesters were arrested at the Broadview facility

Two days prior to September 26, 2025: A shooter opened fire at an ICE facility in Dallas, Texas

Two days prior to September 26, 2025: A gunman killed one detainee at the Dallas ICE facility

Two days prior to September 26, 2025: A gunman injured two others at the Dallas ICE facility

Two days prior to September 26, 2025: The gunman in Dallas took his own life

Last week: Violent clashes between protesters and ICE agents at the Broadview facility led to 16 arrests

Protesters are opposing the transfer of ICE detainees to out-of-state holding centers

Source: Fox News article

URL: https://www.foxnews.com/us/chicago-anti-ice-protesters-block-vehicles-get-hit-tear-gas-pepper-balls

Page 1/10: Headline 'Chicago anti-ICE protesters block vehicles, get hit with tear gas and pepper balls'

Page 2/10: Visual depiction of five individuals in tactical gear and helmets behind a chain-link fence, three holding firearms, facing five civilians

Page 3/10: DHS quote regarding 'criminal illegal aliens who flocked to Chicago and Illinois because they knew Governor [JB] Pritzker and his sanctuary policies would protect them'

Page 3/10: DHS statement on X: 'Sanctuary politicians have demonized federal law enforcement as the enemy — placing a target squarely on the backs of the brave men and women of ICE.'

Page 3/10: DHS statement on X: 'Hateful anti-ICE rhetoric costs lives. Stop now, before these lies damage more innocent people.'

One arrested protester in Broadview was carrying a firearm

Protesters attempted to block vehicles from leaving the Broadview facility