On June 6, 2025, demonstrators began to assemble outside of the Metropolitan Detention Center in Los Angeles in response to accelerated federal raids targeting suspected undocumented immigrants.

Nearly 100 journalists were shot with less-lethal weapons during the anti-ICE protests in Los Angeles from the summer of 2025.

The Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) used scattershot impact projectiles against assemblies.

LAPD Use of Force Directive no. 12 regards the use of the '37mm Less-Lethal Launcher'.

The '37mm Less-Lethal Launcher' is paired with a 'scattershot' kinetic impact projectile (KIP) that fires five polymer projectiles simultaneously in an expanding cone.

On October 23, 2025, Reverend Jorge Bautista was shot with a 40mm grenade launcher at a protest in Oakland, California.

A USBP agent shot at Reverend Jorge Bautista's face from about three feet away.

A solid projectile was seen ricocheting after apparently striking Reverend Jorge Bautista in the chin.

A USBP agent shot a person in the Little Village neighborhood of Chicago from less than five feet away.

The person in the Little Village neighborhood of Chicago was struck by a projectile in the throat.

In Minneapolis, a USBP agent was seen firing at least four rounds of powder blast dispersion rounds in under five minutes.

On January 21, 2026, at Bryant Square Park in Minneapolis, a group of USBP agents deployed grenades that emitted clouds of bright green smoke at protesters.

Commander-At-Large Greg Bovino was among the USBP agents deploying grenades at Bryant Square Park in Minneapolis on January 21, 2026.

A civilian at Bryant Square Park stated, 'the green stuff is super carcinogenic'.

USBP 2026 procurement document for $50 million worth of less-lethal specialty munitions includes five varieties for 'Crowd Management' powder blast rounds.

Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) - Research and documenting organization

Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) - Law enforcement agency

United States Border Patrol (USBP) - Law enforcement agency

US Customs and Border Patrol (CBP) - Law enforcement agency

Reverend Jorge Bautista - Protest victim

Greg Bovino - Commander-At-Large, USBP

Rohini J. Haar, MD, MPH - Medical Advisor, PHR

Scott Reynhout, PhD - Expert, Crowd-Control Weapons, PHR

Kimberly J. Saltz, JD - Legal Fellow, PHR

International Network of Civil Liberties Organizations (INCLO) - Partner organization

Department of Homeland Security (DHS) - Parent agency of USBP/CBP

June 6, 2025: Demonstrators assemble outside Metropolitan Detention Center in Los Angeles.

Summer 2025: Anti-ICE protests in Los Angeles; nearly 100 journalists shot with less-lethal weapons.

October 23, 2025: Reverend Jorge Bautista shot with a 40mm grenade launcher in Oakland, California.

January 21, 2026: USBP agents deploy green smoke grenades at Bryant Square Park in Minneapolis.

2026: USBP procurement of $50 million worth of less-lethal specialty munitions.

USBP procurement of $50 million worth of less-lethal specialty munitions in 2026.

Source: 'Tools of Repression: How U.S. Law Enforcement Escalated the Use of Three Weapons to Crack Down on Immigration Protests'

Publication Date: May 2026

URL: https://phr.org/our-work/resources/tools-of-repression/#case-1

Reference: 'Lethal in Disguise' (prior PHR report series)

Reference: 'Graham v. Connor, 490 US 386 (1989)'

Reference: 'UN Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials'

Reference: '2020 United Nations Human Rights Guidance on Less-Lethal Weapons in Law Enforcement'

Reference: 'UN Chemical Weapons Convention'

Reference: 'Fourth Amendment of the Constitution of the United States'

Reference: 'First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States'

Scattershot KIPs are designed to spread out to hit as many people as possible.

Powder blast dispersion rounds (Muzzle Blast) discharge a plume of pulverized CS (tear gas compound) or OC (pepper agent) extending up to 30 feet.

Powder blast dispersion rounds are typically confined to correctional facilities but used by USBP on streets.

Chemical obscurants (smoke grenades) are used to intimidate or heighten effects of tear gas.

HC smoke is identified as having risks of lung injuries, metabolic issues, and cancers.

LAPD Use of Force Directive no. 12 governs the 37mm Less-Lethal Launcher.